So I'm going to tell you today about a way of looking at the world that I think is substantially different from the way most people look at the world. I want to tell you about this alternative perspective today because I believe it is more inclusive than a standard materialist or scientific view. Of course, the standard view holds that the world is essentially a material place composed of familiar objects. However, there are significant limitations to this perspective. The essential materialist view cannot tell us anything about consciousness, which is probably the primary fact of experience. Neuroscientists in recent years, particularly in the last decade, have been trying to crack the problem of consciousness. They have attempted to associate consciousness with neuronal activity, but this seems to be an incomplete answer. There are many forms of neuronal activity in the brain that aren't accompanied by consciousness at all. Furthermore, neuroscientists understand virtually nothing about consciousness and can't even really figure out what its function is. They can't understand why our brains would go to so much effort to make us aware of things when it isn't clear at all that awareness is necessary for life, especially given that there are many life forms on the planet that don't seem to be aware at all.
The standard view is insufficient in many ways, I believe, philosophically. As you probably all know, a conception that portrays the world as made up of objects is in some fundamental way inadequate. It doesn't seem to have a place for human beings or meaning. Nor does it provide a mode for conceptualizing the real existence of something like an emotion or a dream or a motivation – phenomena that are just as mysterious to neuroscience. The problem with this seems to be mostly experiential: If you ask people what they know most intimately, they will tell you number one, they are conscious; number two, their internal, experiential life is composed of emotions and motivational states, which, although not rational in essential structure, are so real and relevant that virtually everything people do is predicated on them. Our current viewpoint, despite its ability to give us tremendous technological power, seems to erase from formal consideration many essential experiences that are vital to life – experiences that may even be primary.
Thousands of years ago, Plato proposed that all knowledge is remembering. Of course, we don't believe that today. We believe we gather knowledge as a consequence of contact with the world. Yet, you'll see that the knowledge I'm about to share with you will strike a deep chord of remembering. This is because everything you've done throughout your life is in some way predicated on what I'll tell you today. I'll demonstrate this in a peculiar way. I think I should, as I plan to start by telling you a story. The reason for this is that models of the world which include phenomena like consciousness and emotions and motivations and actions and interactions are generally portrayed formally in stories and not in scientific theories. It turns out that stories themselves have an identifiable structure, even a grammar, that makes them comprehensible. Furthermore, even the simplest stories, especially if they're elegantly constructed, have an unbelievably profound underlying meaning. You can frequently see this most particularly in children's stories. I remember showing my son, when he was 4 years old, the Disney movie "Pinocchio." On the surface, it's a very strange tale: A wooden puppet who wants to become real must rescue his father from the belly of a whale. A structure that could by no means be considered rational. It's so surprising and unexpected that it's remarkable to imagine grown men and women, including children, can sit in a movie theater and watch a story like that unfold without ever thinking for a second that it's absolutely peculiar. They can take it in experientially as real.
Pinocchio is a deep, deep story. It has echoes that go back 3,000 to 4,000 years to the earliest stories we know. It's so rich with information that a child can watch it over and over and over again. I think my son wants Pinocchio 30 times why? Either because a child cannot tell the difference between fantasy and reality, or it's because there's something to those stories that's much more potent than we consciously understand. It's interesting, too. If you go to a video rental establishment, you'll find that in the top 10 highest grossing movies of all time are four Disney movies - animated fairy tales essentially retelling mythological stories. They strike a deep chord. Why? Shakespeare was, of course, a great literary figure. He set it perhaps better than anyone else. He said, "All the world's a stage, and all the men and women merely players; they have their exits and their entrances. One man in his time plays many parts." Following from that, you can imagine that a story is no more about the props in the world than a play you go see is about the props on the stage. A drama is about the man – or woman – in which people actually exist: the emotions they feel, the motivational states they encounter, the problems they have to solve when they interact with each other. The play is but a vessel from that particular perspective in which we can capture those aspects of our experience that are not only real but essentially human.
I'm going to tell you a little story to begin this. It's a children's story for kids around 4 years old, but it's very elegant. I tried to cut it down for this talk, but I couldn't because it was so well-edited that every piece fit perfectly to make the story complete. Here's the structure of the story. This diagram is useful in many ways and it's quite simple. It says that whenever you're doing anything, you inhabit a bounded world. For example, you're sitting here in this lecture. There are things you pay attention to, and there are things you don't. If I took most of you out of this room right now and asked you what color the rug was or what color your chair was, for instance, or what the person next to you was wearing, you wouldn't know these details – even if the blessed person happens to be your husband or wife. The reason for that is when you're in a situation like this and attending to a speaker, most of the occurrences unfolding around you are irrelevant. You don't store them; you only focus on certain things. But how do you decide what to focus on, given that there are virtually unlimited things to pay attention to? You have to conceive of yourself as being somewhere and going somewhere. So you could say in a real sense, the world you inhabit is a journey – it's a journey from point A to point B, a journey from what is to what should be, a journey from where you are, which is insufficient in some important manner, to where you're going, which will be better in some important way. A standard story has exactly this structure: a child comes home, and you ask them, "What happened to you today on the way to school?" This sets up the little narrative structure, and the child unfolds the sequence of events they encountered. If the story is more interesting than just a recount of exactly what happened, it usually involves an encounter with something unexpected on the way to point B and a description of how that encounter with the unexpected was resolved.
Now why would you want to know this? Why would you want to listen to it? It's because on your journey from point A to point B, all sorts of unexpected things always happen. If someone else has encountered something unexpected and conjured up a decent solution to it, it could well be worth your time to listen. Well, maybe there's a pattern to encountering the unexpected. Maybe there's a proper way to encounter the unexpected. It's possible that in our collective wisdom as human beings, we've gathered up representations of ways to encounter the unexpected and put them forth in our stories. How should you face what you don't understand? For a moment, consider this from a different perspective. Can you imagine exactly what it is that it says? There's no such thing as a dragon.We all know that dragons are fictitious creatures with reptilian features, terrible in some ways, and capable of living forever while breathing fire. It's a strange combination of attributes. Why would something terrible be called a treasure? Billy Bixby was rather surprised when he woke up one morning and found a dragon in his room. It was a small dragon, about the size of a kitten. The dragon wagged its tail happily when Billy patted it on the head. Interesting. In Chinese mythology, a dragon is a positive figure. In European mythology, the dragon is something to face in combat and destroy or build something out of the pieces left over from the dragon. Cluttering up the world's order, and the reason she got sensitive to that as a child was because children are really dependent on order. I mean, and the reason for that is that their realm of competence is rather restricted. They like to see things in order. For example, they're not happy with you if you play a game with them and then mess around with the rules of the game. They don't like that at all; they think it's immoral activity to shake up the structure of the game.
Well, anyways, she came into our bedroom one night and said, "Dad, I had a nightmare." Now we all know that nightmares aren't real – just like dragons' dreams aren't. This raises the question: Why do we bother having them for six or seven hours a night every single day of our lives? They're recognized features of animal behavior all the way down to the amphibian level. She said, "I dreamt that there was a clear, flowing stream, but in the stream, there were all sorts of garbage. It scared me and bothered me so much that I woke up." So I told her, "Look, close your eyes and imagine the stream. It's full of garbage. What should you do about it?" She replied, "Well, I should take the garbage out of the street." I said, "All right, picture the stream. Picture yourself cleaning the garbage out of it." She calmed down and went back to sleep. Why? Because dreams concentrate on threats. We know that they present threats to us – threats we haven't been able to deal with. There's a part of your brain that tracks these threats, and it's not particularly smart in some ways. All it does is say, "Look here's the problem," and waits for the rest of your brain to conjure up a solution. If it doesn't, it just presents the problem over and over and over again. People who have post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), for example, who've been really upset by contact with something unexpected, dream about the same tragedy forever until they solve it. They solve it by facing it and living it over and over voluntarily. So you might think that suggesting to a 4-year-old daughter, who's just had a nightmare, that her fears aren't real and that the dream representation of them isn't real because it's not tangible – like a table – might not be the best approach to the problem. But Billy seemed to have it right. "The dragon wagged its tail happily when Billy patted its head," he said. "Billy went downstairs to tell his mother there's no such thing as a dragon." His mother replied, "There isn't," said Billy's mother, meaning it. "Tell me, have you ever actually been in a house where there's a dragon?"
My guess is, if you don't take this particularly seriously and allow yourself to use your imagination and think metaphorically for a moment, you've all encountered dozens of houses filled right to the rafters with various dragons. All of which were being studiously ignored by the people who inhabited the house. Billy went back to his room and began to dress. The dragon came close to Billy in a friendly manner and wagged its tail, but Billy didn't pat it. If there's no such thing as a dragon, it's silly to pander to it. Billy washed his face and hands and went down to breakfast. The dragon was bigger now, almost the size of a dog. Billy sat down at the table. The dragon sat down on the table. This sort of thing was not usually permitted, but there wasn't much Billy's mother could do about it. She'd already said there was no such thing as a dragon. And if there's no such thing, you can't tell it to get down off the table. Sometimes I sit with friends of mine who are very young children at the table. Children two or three years old don't sit at the table; they sit on the table or run around it. Or they run around the house and pull things off all the shelves, keeping their parents so busy chasing them around that they have no time whatsoever to interact as adults. So you have to wonder, under those circumstances, whether you're dealing with a child or a dragon - so to speak. And you also might wonder whether or not the dragon is large and unruly precisely because the parents are completely unwilling to admit that it actually exists. Mother made pancakes for Billy. The dragon ate them all. Mother made some more, but the dragon hadn't finished those two. Mother kept making pancakes until she ran out of batter. Billy only got one of them, but he said that was all he really wanted anyway. Once, an acquaintance of ours in Boston brought their son over to be babysat at our house. His nanny had just been in a car accident, so he was being shunted from house to house while his parents went off to work. He didn't have a very good reputation - this kid, who was about 4 years old. He came over to our house with his mother in the morning, and she dropped him off, saying, "Here's Billy."
Dragon connected with this child, who was interviewing me, showed itself with its ability to eat. I returned at noon. My wife had taken care of the children - not that day - and I walked into the house. The other four or five kids we had in the house were off playing. This little boy was standing in the corner, looking upset and fundamentally isolated. I went over and poked him a few times because generally, poking a kid lightly makes them recoil. However, this boy wasn't going to play with me. He'd already learned that adults should either be ignored or considered trouble, so he wouldn't let any adult into his little world. There was definitely a dragon connected to this little boy, and it was eating all his pancakes. Billy went upstairs to brush his teeth. Mother started clearing the table. The dragon, who was now as big as mother, made itself comfortable on the entire rug and went to sleep. I really liked that one. By the time Billy came back downstairs, he exclaimed too fast, "There's no such thing as a dragon!" Mother responded firmly, cleaning the downstairs, which took her all morning. The dragon, being quite large by this time, was in the way and required climbing in and out of windows to get from room to room. You know, think back to your own experience when you've been to a house where there was a dragon hiding underneath the living room rug, and no one was mentioning it. Then consider how long it takes to get something absolutely simple done in a house jammed to the rafters with unfinished business forever. Why? Because there is an issue in the household that has been ignored for a very long time and has grown so large that it occupies the entire domain.
Are you in the house, where the dragon lived? Its head hung out the front door, and its tail hung out the back. No room escaped having some part of the dragon in it. When the dragon awakened from his nap, he was hungry. The bakery truck passed by, and the smell of fresh bread was too enticing for him. He ran down the street after the bakery truck. The house followed along, like a snail's shell. The mailman approached up the path with mail for the Bixbys, but their house rushed past him and headed down the street. The dragon chased it for a few blocks but couldn't catch it. When Mr. Bixby returned home for lunch, the first thing he noticed was that his house was gone. Luckily, one of the neighbors could tell him which way it had gone. Such things happen to people not frequently. They're not really looking around and paying attention to what's going on. They come home from work one day, and their house is gone. What does that mean? Maybe the children have become completely alienated from them or perhaps Mrs. Bixby had suddenly decided to leave. In the 1890s in India, as a house was being built, the local priest equivalent came by to set the foundation stone. When you set the foundation stone, he took a big spike and drove it into the ground where the foundation would be laid. He did this to keep the great dragon that lay beneath the earth firmly pinned down by its head, so it couldn't move and shake the house to bits. This means the same thing as when you're told not to build your house on a foundation of sand in the New Testament. It doesn't matter how good the house is or how well constructed it is or how rich it is; if the foundation is made of sand or rests on a dragon, there will be nothing positive accomplished within that household. Mr. Bixby climbed over the dragon's head onto the porch roof and asked through the upstairs window, "How did this happen?" The dragon replied, "Billy."
"There's no such thing as a mother saying, 'There isn't a dragon.' Billy insisted, 'There is, and it's a very big one.' Billy patted the dragon on the head, and it wagged its tail happily. Then, even faster than it had grown, the dragon began getting smaller again. Why did it have to grow so large? I'm not sure,' I said to Billy, 'but I think it just wanted to be noticed. Firstly, consider what happens if you don't pay a bill. Really don't pay it on time. At first, it's only the size of a kitten. But if you leave it alone for 2 or 3 years, it grows into a full-fledged dragon. Why? Because neglected things have a life of their own – complex lives, like a bill. Bills are attached to an entire industrial complex, one of whose major functions is to ensure that you pay them. If you don't pay the bill, you'll immediately find out what it's connected to: something immense and very troublesome. If you allow the full force of that thing to manifest itself, it's not pretty. One lesson from this story is that if something is nagging at you a little, it's better to deal with it before it turns into a full-fledged dragon. What if it's already a full-fledged dragon? Then, there's nothing left but to run away. Now, let me tell you what we've learned from 50 years of studying the outcomes of clinical psychological interventions. In an extreme case, let's say something truly terrible has happened to you, and as a consequence, you're in post-traumatic shock – a condition serious enough to damage your brain over time. It's not only a psychological disorder; it's a physical one. If your cortisol level remains high for an extended period, cortisol (in high doses) becomes a neurotoxin and begins damaging your brain. Let's consider an extreme case: imagine that you've been violently sexually assaulted and, as a result, are in post-traumatic shock. How do you recover? In New York, one of the world's top clinical psychologists has been dealing with women suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder for decades. She's found a treatment that works."
As much detail as possible, over and over, in the imagination – with accompanying emotion – she found. Because she had conducted physiological measurements on her clients, women who allowed themselves to get fully upset during this process got better faster and stayed better longer. The clinical evidence was clear: when you take someone to therapy, you do two (or three) things well. You allow them to confess what's wrong, as it's useful to articulate the issue clearly and distinctly. And you must have a direction in life, or else there is no structure. If your path from point A to B is being blocked by fear, learn to confront it – if you don't, it will grow and expand until it becomes the kind of dragon that occupies your entire house. This is another representation of a simple story I believe is most applicable to children. There are aspects of it that are particularly relevant to children: sexual desire (though this isn't the primary focus). It's a map of motivation, essentially saying: this. The movie's origin doesn't matter; there are certain elements common to all fiction – two broad classes, for instance: adventure and romance. What is an adventure? To go to new lands, discover something new, and be transformed as a result. What is a romance? To meet another person who is as complex as anything you could encounter on an adventure, and again, be transformed as a consequence of the contact. Fundamental plots: why are there fundamental plots, and why can we understand them without being explicitly told? Because fundamentally, we're all very similar; we have a finite set of basic needs. For example, hot people would rather be cool, thirsty people would rather have water, and hungry people would rather eat. In the Old Testament, for instance, an agrarian community often perceived paradise as the land of milk and honey. Why? Because milk is high in fat and honey is high in glucose – if you're truly hungry, there's nothing more enticing than fat and sugar.
Affiliate of desire, we like to be around other people. Sexual desire is a fundamental, sub-element of a romantic plot. These underlying motivational systems of ours set us up in a bounded world within which we live. For example, if you fall in love with someone and construe your destiny as being with them, any indication that they're pleased with you produces a rash of positive emotion. Why? Because our emotional systems are set up so that any sign that we're moving towards our goal is responded to with a rush of positive emotion. Conversely, a frown from the person that you love, especially in the initial ages of a romance, is met with a flood of negative affect. Why? Because anything that stops us on the path that we've chosen produces negative emotion. That's how we're set up; our emotional systems are quite straightforward. We pause and make something a goal – the thing about people is that we can pause it virtually anything as a goal, one of the things that distinguishes us from animals. So we can all be thrilled to death when our favorite soccer team scores a goal because we participate in what they're doing – the same way we participate in watching a protagonist on a movie or in a book. We can feel it, embody it. We even know now that the neural systems I utilize to watch a movie involve the same neural systems the actor is utilizing, acting out the part. When you say you understand someone else, what do you mean? Is your body set to do exactly the same thing theirs is, and your emotional systems are locked on in the same way? This is why – when they experience something, you experience an echo of it. That's what understanding means. It turns out as well that those neural systems that allow us to embody someone else and imitate them are right underneath the structures we've evolved to use for language. What that indicates is that mostly what we use language for is to tell stories – to tell stories about the way people act – so that we can derive information not about what the world's made of, because we don't really care about that some fundamental way, but instead, how should we act? That's the fundamental question. If you go see a movie about a thug, for instance, you're not primarily interested in the physics of the fists flying or the chemistry of the gunpowder. You're interested in what it would mean to be that thug – how he thinks, feels, and acts. That's where our evolved capacity for language comes into play. We use it to explore the human condition.
The message given is that the thug generally comes to not-so-good places and doesn't act like a thug. It might be interesting, compelling as a lifestyle, at least sufficiently so. But it's not a good long-term strategy. What is a good long-term strategy? We've been collecting stories for a long time – perhaps even for 100,000 years. There may have been creatures like us indistinguishable from us for that long. Societies that appear archaic as those old societies tell stories, have rituals, and mythology. We have ancient written stories, such as the Epic of Gilgamesh, which is a Sumerian story over 4,000 years old based on an oral tradition probably 20,000 years older than that. We've been collecting stories for a long time – what do they mean? What are they good for? Imagine this: you tell a fascinating story to your husband or wife. Now, imagine that you could collect a thousand of the most interesting stories and then imagine that you were some kind of literary genius like Shakespeare. You can take those thousand interesting stories and boil them down to 100 really engaging stories. Then imagine that you had 10,000 years to gather up those 100 most interesting stories and average them. You could come out with one perfect story – the best story ever told. That's what I meant: the most interesting story possible. Just as this little story I just told you has an underlying mythological structure, virtually every story you ever see has such a structure. That's why it's compelling to us. When we meet someone charismatic or holding our attention, there's a high probability they're acting out a mythological fragment. That's why our attention is captivated by them. From this perspective, you're all sitting in this room. You think if I took you out of here, how would you describe it? It's full of chairs, a table, and lights. Why pick that level of resolution? Why not say the average ceiling tile had about 15,000 dots on it? That doesn't seem like a relevant data point, right? You say the same thing about the rod – there's no limit to what you could count: the number of stains or red spots, the way the light plays off your partner's shirt, or the shine on your shoes. If you were an artist, trying to make a representation of this room, you'd concentrate on aspects of the world completely different from those you're focusing on now.
You talk about chairs, TVs, cabinets, tables. Why are they functional? They're tools, things you can use. Normally, as you go from Point A to Point B, you divide the world into things you can use and things that might get in the way. As you move from one motivated world to another, the little stories you inhabit, you drop the world up into different pieces. A piano for a concert pianist is different than a piano for someone with no musical education. You always pass up the world in terms of what it's good for, how it can serve your purposes. Even now, the question is: How do you parse the world into things useful to you? Chairs are complicated. The question is: What do you do when something unexpected happens? Imagine you've had a 15-year-long marriage and find lipstick on your husband's collar - not once but three times. You think, "But how do I interpret this behavior? There's an aspect completely outside my scope. Do I ignore it? It's easy to do that. Why wouldn't I? But if I don't ignore it, I have to think...really, really complicatedly. If they're not who I thought they were, who might they be? I might also think, Well, maybe I'm not who I thought I was because I got sucked into this situation. I thought I'd pretty much understood the world, but turns out that I certainly don't understand the opposite gender, and there's some indication that I really don't even understand myself because fundamentally, I'm so clueless. Then you might think, Well, when did this cluelessness start? How long have I been blind? Do I really want to ask that question? Not generally, it's easy to keep the dragon in the closet - where it tends to live. What happens when you encounter something unexpected for a long time? Psychologists thought people learned fear. A typical person or lab rat was a common creature. It's a funny thing: if you take a lab rat out of its home cage and put it in a new cage, where you want to teach it to be afraid of something - say, a light paired with a shock - the funny thing about the rat is, it needs to let itself calm down before it's normal.
Well, except that you might think that the not-comrade is also the normal route. Right, you take the rat out of his cage and put him in the new one. And what does he do? He goes like this - why? He's a rat, right. Someone might eat them, so he's a bit nervous about being in this new situation. Rats do not like being in new situations; they don't like bright light. If you put them in a new situation that's brightly lit, they go right over to the corner because they think maybe cats won't find them. Rats are so afraid of cats that they never even have to meet one to be afraid of it. You can take a rat that's never seen a cat in its life and, if you let it smell a cat or show it a picture, it will tell you. If you show a rat a cat somewhere it doesn't expect it, he will run back to his burrow and scream for 24 hours. Are you mad at how scared you'd have to be to scream for 24 hours, especially given that the rat lives about a year? That would be for you like screaming for three months. Right back to his girl, and he screams. Every other rat who hears him scream freezes and they all stay like that for 24 hours until they calm down. The first thing they do is go back to the place where they saw the cat and start what's called corner runs. This is so the rat wants to go back to this territory, knows the territory - it might be a place where he gets food. Is the cat still there? What you might think: stay in the barrel. But then maybe you don't get something to eat. So the rat goes back to the place where the cat was, carefully. Then he hunkers down and runs over part of it. If nothing kills them, he goes back and does the same thing with a little more of the territory until finally, the rats have run all over the territory again. Then they go back to eating, making love, paying attention to their families - they're quite social, despite being rats. The rats might have to go back to the scene of the crime, so to speak. It's not going to let the dragon that might be there grow. The rat knows that if something is terrifying, it should be investigated, not run away from.
The question is: What do you encounter when you encounter something unexpected? You may have your spouse mapped out, but they surprise you with an unexpected action. Who is this person precisely, and what does that mean? When you encounter something unexpected, the first thing you see is not the world; it's a sense of discomfort and fear combined with latent curiosity. The world is not the way you thought it was. To find out what the world is actually like, we must investigate. It requires taking a risk and moving forward, just as people do in psychotherapy. Find the thing you're avoiding and confront it. Time and anxiety disorders, including agoraphobia, can cause severe anxiety. Agoraphobia is a type of generalized anxiety disorder. People who suffer severely from agoraphobia may become housebound and unable to leave their room or home. They may even fear leaving the safety of these confines. There's nowhere to run; they're stuck being somewhere. I said, "Let's go up to 20 feet." I might do that, and then you let them stand there. Standing still for an extended period can bore them. You say, "Could you go ten feet? No, it's too close. How about three more feet? Yes, I think I could do that." They go three more feet and stand there. Eventually, they find out nothing terrible is happening. They go another three feet, then another. Confronting their fear, they're almost inside the elevator but hesitant to look at it directly. You say, "Look at the elevator, look at the numbers step by step."
Sooner or later, and usually sooner, people have gone up a floor. Then what happens? Let's go home and have a fight with her husband – a battle that has been brewing for fifteen years. Why? It's not because the elevator is symbolically related to the fight; it's because individuals learn something essential in these confrontations, which just so happens to take place inside an elevator. They discover they can face their fears without being destroyed by the experience. And immediately, contrary to an original psychoanalytic prediction, this person does not avoid elevators. Instead, they are shopping in malls, hailing taxis, and back on the subway, standing up for themselves at home. This generalization holds true because they did not learn that the elevator was frightening; instead, they learned that, despite being terrified by it, they were up to the challenge. Now consider an obsessive-compulsive patient I once had. He worked in a biolab in Montreal and had a severe fear of contaminating others. An example of his compulsion would be: "I'll go to a market in a third-world country, touch some fruit, and bring home a nasty bacterial disease that will kill my kids." You tell them, "The chances of that are one in 150,000. Doesn't matter. What if my kids die? That poses a problem, doesn't it? It isn't clear from a logical perspective where you should draw the risk line." But what if something truly terrible happens to us? Consider Patience in the forest – an experience that ranks with the most terrifying. This involves not just physical violation but also the stripping of social dignity. Then there are other kinds of confrontations: death and disease are dragons, but so too are social dragons like bureaucracies and tyrannies. Alexander Solzhenitsyn, an author you may or may not know, shares a chilling story from his experiences as a prisoner in the Soviet gulag concentration camp system. Between 1919 and 1959, this system killed at least 60 million people – ten times more than Hitler's genocide. In the Russian front, a brutal place to be, Solzhenitsyn was captured by the Germans, who did not care for Russians. They put them in separate POW camps due to Stalin's refusal to sign the Geneva Convention on the treatment of prisoners of war. The Germans starved these POWs so severely that if other POWs were nearby, they would throw food packages over the wire, even though they themselves weren't well-fed.
They were contaminated by their exposure to the Western economic system, and as a consequence, they posed a threat to the integrity of the Soviet states. So he threw them all in concentration camps. It had been sitting there on a pile of clay in the concentration camp for some time. The clay, which his compatriots would eat because they were so damn hungry, was better than nothing at all. He thought, What the hell did I do to get here? It's remarkable to think about this - there was the Second World War and Stalin, one of the world's worst monsters, the concentration camps, P.O.W. camps, and many other things that happened to society. But he had nothing but time to think in the concentration camp, and he wasn't happy with the way things had turned out. So he made a vow in the camp: He would go back over his entire life, from day one, and try to remember every time he did something wrong, according to his conscience, not someone else's. The consequence was that he wrote a three-volume book called "The Gulag Archipelago," 1,900 pages long. He memorized it because there wasn't any paper in Pennsylvania. And then it circulated in the underground in the Soviet Union for years before it was published in the West (in 1975). It's interesting to consider one man - skinny as a rail, three-quarters dead, with numbers tattooed on his arm - who, under completely unreasonable circumstances, took personal responsibility for the position he found himself in. The consequence of this was that he was still alive 25 years later, but the Soviet Union no longer existed. Can't the world work that way? It's an intriguing thought. Take one man - he's a skinny, rail-thin, three-quarters dead man with numbers tattooed on his arm. He decided, under completely unreasonable circumstances, to take personal responsibility for the position he found himself in. The consequence of this was that he was still alive 25 years later, but the Soviet Union no longer existed. Is it really impossible for the world to work that way? But consider this - we've had a pretty nasty century in the last 100 years: the Nazis, Stalin, recent tragedies in Africa. We don't seem to learn anything about genocide. Might it be our fault? Why are we ignoring it? Good question. Can you make peace with your own family? It's not easy, right? It's probably no easier than making peace between the Israelis and Palestinians. What do we encounter when we encounter something we don't understand?
It's not the simple world of objects. The simple world of objects is something we've learned to see. The real world is way more complicated than what we simply see. Let me give you an example. When I was in Montreal in 1985, my computer crashed. When a computer encounters something unexpected, it crashes. You can't do anything about it. I checked the monitor; it was okay. The traffic lights were off throughout the city, and the entire city was in darkness. I found out the next day that there had been a solar wind. A big solar flare put out a big cloud of electrons, which zipped along to Earth at the speed of light and sent an electrical pulse through the hydroelectric power grids in Red and Quebec, causing my computer to crash. I hadn't realized until then that the integrity of my computer was dependent on the stability of the sun. Everything is more complicated than it appears, and when you just look at something, you see a very simple representation of what's actually there. What do you encounter when you encounter something unexpected? But it makes you curious – are dragons real? Every primate fears lizards, including us. If you showed a chimpanzee a snake for the first time, it would hit the roof of its cage and then look at the snake. Why would a dragon hoard gold? Does a dragon represent everything that we're afraid of? Absolutely, everything that you need to find is embedded in what you're afraid of. Run from what you're afraid of; run from exactly what you need to find. What are the oldest dramatic representations we know of? Not this specific painting – this is St. George and the Dragon. The dragon lived in the ground, and heroes of previous generations chased it down and re-emerged, threatening the integrity of the community like everything unexpected does. The hero comes out and slays the dragon. In this case, it's a virtual woman, and the dragon's horde of gold because... Parents were divorced. A child around 4 years old was running around the house with his little plastic knight helmet on and a sword, zipping around killing things with it. He did this all the time, even when he went to sleep at night, and he'd put the sword by his pillow and the knight helmet on his pillow every night or every second night or every third night for 6 months. He'd been waking up screaming. Why? He was about to go to kindergarten – a real threshold for maternal dependence, fundamentally entering the real world. That's a new thing, but there was also upset in his house. Dwarves killing one another was a big deal. I asked him, "What can you do about that?" In a legal trial, that would have been an inadmissible question – it's called leading the witness because what I told him was, "Despite the horror of this situation, you might be able to do something about it." He replied, "Ha! I take my sword; I get my dad. That's a good idea, right? Dad is the real dad, and then there's the traditional dad. You might as well have your father by your side if you're going to go into battle. I take my sword; I get my dad; I go where the dragon was; I jump up on its head and poke both of its eyes out with the sword; I'd go down its throat to the place where the fire comes out and cut a piece of that box out, using it as a shield. It's unbelievable – he could do that. It's perfect. There's no sense going after the dwarfs if you can go after the dragon."
A piece that can defend you against anything, including other dragons. So what if this were the case? Evolutionarily speaking or religiously, what if we were adapted to the world now? What if it's not the simple place of dead objects that we think it is? What if it's something a lot more alive, a lot more like a story? You have absolutely everything you need. But you must use all of it. If you run away from any of it – and in particular, the parts that frighten you, which you know there are endless reasons to do so – if you run away from any of it, you don't get that piece of the dragon's armor. There's a chink in your defense, a place where you're vulnerable. If you make even one mistake, you lessen yourself. If you lessen yourself, you can run away more easily. Not only that, when someone wants to lean on you, I will be able to lean on you because you'll just fall over. What if it were the case that we were truly adapted to the world? That if we made full use of all our talents, we'd be okay? What if it were the case that we set out consciously never to run away from what we shouldn't, that everything would be all right? You may think whatever you want, but this is my belief. I believe it's amazing that a children's book – the one I read at the beginning of this lecture – contained all that information. So you might ask yourself, if that information isn't true, how on earth did it get there?
